docs: Module 1 and 2 (multiple Sections) (B9lab content updates 1) (#791)
cosmos/sdk-tutorials: b9lab-content/2-what-is-cosmos/02-blockchain-and-cosmos.md

# Blockchain Technology and Cosmos

Let's begin our journey with a brief review of blockchain technology, how Cosmos came into being, and what it brings to the world:

* An internet of blockchains,
* A better DApp user experience,
* A simplified specialised DApp development experience,
* Facilitated scalability,
* Increased sovereignty to DApps, and
* Speed and fast finality.

> ## The World of Blockchains - From Public General-Purpose to Purpose-Built Chains

Reviewer: I like the idea of using an em dash instead. I will keep an eye out to make sure it is implemented throughout the content.

The building blocks of blockchain technology can be found in the 1980s and 1990s, when breakthroughs in computer science and cryptography laid the necessary groundwork. Eventually, it took until 2008 for blockchain technology per se to be invented.

Necessary preliminary work included append-only, cryptographically secure logs using hashing, authentication and encryption keys, as well as the conceptual development of smart contracts and consensus mechanisms in peer-to-peer (P2P) networks with Byzantine fault-tolerance (BFT).

> On a fateful October 31, 2008, an individual, or group, calling itself Satoshi Nakamoto proposed a **P2P network for a digital currency**, calling it **Bitcoin**. It introduced a novel consensus  mechanism called Proof-of-Work (PoW). Suddenly, it became possible to send online payments directly between parties **independently of financial institutions and trusted third parties**. Bitcoin became the first public, decentralized application.

Reviewer 2: "On a fateful <date>" should probably be "On the fateful ..."

> On a fateful October 31, 2008, an individual, or group, calling itself Satoshi Nakamoto proposed a **P2P network for a digital currency**, calling it **Bitcoin**. It introduced a novel consensus  mechanism called Proof-of-Work (PoW). Suddenly, it became possible to send online payments directly between parties **independently of financial institutions and trusted third parties**. Bitcoin became the first public, decentralized application.

Reviewer: @barriebyron I agree. Will change it too.

<ExpansionPanel title="I heard about PoW, tell me more">

Proof-of-Work (PoW), used to achieve BFT, is best described as a cryptographic puzzle solved by a network's node, called miner. The puzzle is a task of pre-defined, arbitrary difficulty. At the scale of the network, the outcome is akin to a lottery with a single winning node.

In most cases, the task consists of a search for an unknown, random number (in the jargon, a nonce). For it to be a winning nonce, when combined with ordered transactions in a block, the result ought to be a hash value matching a pre-defined criteria. Finding the nonce is evidence of considerable effort, or work, invested in the search. Each node uses its computing power to be the first to solve the puzzle, winning the right to author the latest block.

Here, economic incentives come into play: The node that announces a solution first receives a reward. This incentivizes participation, investing computing power into solving the task, and helps maintain the network's functioning.

</ExpansionPanel>

> With the introduction of Bitcoin, the **development of decentralized applications (DApps)** - applications built on a decentralized network - began. In the early days, developing DApps could only be done by **forking the Bitcoin codebase** or **building on it**. However, Bitcoin's monolithic codebase and limited, not user-friendly scripting language made DApp development a tedious and complex process for developers.

Reviewer 2: we'll use the approved term "dapp" for decentralized dapps per the [Cosmos Word List](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/15raX8lfzzeeifGrDiXSFTHaEDbsMVlFJzKgnNelihjs/edit#gid=0)

<ExpansionPanel title="What's a Blockchain, really?">

> **Blockchain protocols** define programs that **hold a state** and that describe how to modify it according to the received inputs. Those inputs are called transactions.
> 
> The consensus ensures that a blockchain has a **canonical transaction history**. It follows that the **state is deterministic**, meaning if you begin with the same genesis state and replicate all conducted changes, you always achieve the same state.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Blockchain protocols define programs that hold a state and describe how to modify the state according to the received inputs. Those inputs are called transactions.

The consensus ensures that a blockchain has a canonical transaction history. So it follows that the state is deterministic, meaning if you begin with the same genesis state and replicate all conducted changes, you always achieve the same state.
```

Reviewer 2: for complex ideas and sentences, let's work to prevent unclear references (it on line 34). My former editor called these unclear antecedents "the naked it" or "the naked this" oof
see https://developers.google.com/style/word-list#letter-t

> Bitcoin's codebase may have been monolithic, but it nevertheless was a blockchain architecture, i.e. could be split into **three layers**:
> 
> * **Network layer:** Tasked with discovering nodes and propagating transactions and consensus-related messages between single nodes;
> * **Consensus layer:** Runs the consensus protocol between the single nodes of a P2P network;
> * **Application layer:** In effect, running a state machine, which defines the application's state and updates it with the processing of transactions, in accordance with the result of the consensus.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Although Bitcoin's codebase may have been monolithic, its blockchain architecture can be split into three layers:

* Network layer: Tasked with discovering nodes and propagating transactions and consensus-related messages between single nodes;
* Consensus layer: Runs the consensus protocol between the single nodes of a P2P network;
* Application layer: In effect, running a state machine that defines the application's state and updates it with the processing of transactions, in accordance with the result of the consensus.
```

Reviewer 2: I wonder if we can talk about the use (overuse) of bolding? Our words are very strong and informative, so let's find a style that we all agree with and use consistently. Less is more.

Reviewer 2: so Bitcoin architecture is no longer monolithic? (if it still is, we can use "codebase is monolithic")

Reviewer: I'll have a look out at our overuse of bolding. We often like to use it to highlight the central theme of a paragraph.
I changed the part on the Bitcoin architecture.

</ExpansionPanel>

> After the introduction of Bitcoin, several so-called **public chains** came into being. Among them was **Ethereum** in 2014, a public blockchain with **smart-contract** functionality. This functionality enables applications based on these self-executing, self-enforcing, and self-verifying account holding objects. Other general-purpose chains followed.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
After the introduction of Bitcoin, several so-called public chains came into being. Among them was Ethereum in 2014, a public blockchain with smart-contract functionality. This functionality enables applications based on self-executing, self-enforcing, and self-verifying account holding objects. Other general-purpose chains followed.
```

Reviewer 2: can you tell I really really want to dissuade the overuse of bold?

Given the features of existing public blockchain projects and the requirements for privacy in certain industries, a push started in favor of **private, or managed, chains**, and more generally _private distributed ledgers_, i.e. blockchains with access barriers and sophisticated permission management. Platforms for permissioned networks such as R3's Corda and the Hyperledger Project's Hyperledger Fabric from the Linux Foundation are such examples.

The eventual development of further and more complex applications required a more flexible environment. This led to the launch of multiple **purpose-built chains**, each providing a platform tailored to the necessities of its application, i.e. use case. Still, each of these blockchains acted as self-contained environments, limited by the use cases they were envisioned for.

**General-purpose chains are limited to simplistic use case applications, while purpose-built chains only fit certain use cases.** The question arises: *Is it possible to build a platform for all use cases that does away with the limitations of general-purpose chains?*

## How does Cosmos fit into the general development of blockchain technology?

> In 2014, Jae Kwon and Ethan Buchman founded the Cosmos network with its consensus algorithm, [Tendermint](https://tendermint.com/).

Reviewer: I will include the links to the whitepapers. I do believe it is a good idea to link to them.
I will also add in some more detail on the founding. Thank you @ebuchman for the clarification.

<ExpansionPanel title="The skinny on Tendermint">

> Tendermint is a BFT consensus algorithm and a consensus engine. It is a Replicated State Machine (RSM) that helps replicating an application on several machines. As such, it guarantees BFT properties for distributed systems and their applications.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Tendermint is a BFT consensus algorithm and a consensus engine. It enables applications to be replicated, in sync, on many machines. The result is known as a Replicated State Machine with Byzantine Fault Tolerance. It guarantees BFT properties for distributed systems and their applications.
```

It does this in:

> * A **secure** manner - Tendermint continues working even if up to 1/3 of machines fail, and

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* A **secure** manner - Tendermint continues working even if up to 1/3 of machines fail or misbehave, and
```

* A **consistent** way - every machine computes the same state and accesses the same transaction log.

Tendermint is widely used across the industry and the most mature BFT consensus engine for Proof-of-Stake (PoS) blockchains.

For more on Tendermint, have a look at this helpful [introduction](https://docs.tendermint.com/master/introduction/what-is-tendermint.html).

</ExpansionPanel>

> Initially, Cosmos was an open-source community project built by the Tendermint team. Since then, the **Interchain Foundation** (ICF) has assisted with the development and launch of the network. The ICF is a Swiss non-profit that after an initial coin offering (ICO) in 2017 raised funds to finance the development of open-source projects building on the Cosmos network.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Initially, Cosmos was an open-source community project built by the Tendermint team. Since then, the **Interchain Foundation** (ICF) has assisted with the development and launch of the network. The ICF is a Swiss non-profit that after an initial fundraising event in 2017 raised funds to finance the development of open-source projects building on the Cosmos network.
```

<HighlightBox type="tip">

> Take a look at the 2019 [Cosmos White Paper](https://v1.cosmos.network/resources/whitepaper) to find out more about the origins of Cosmos!

Reviewer 3: This is the original whitepaper from 2016

In a blockchain context, vertical scalability is typically achieved through the optimization of the consensus mechanism and applications running on the chain. On the consensus side, Cosmos achieves vertical scalability with the help of the Tendermint BFT. For instance, the Cosmos Hub currently conducts transactions in seven seconds. In a single blockchain context, the only remaining bottleneck is then the application.

Consensus mechanism and application optimization of one's blockchain can only take one so far. To overcome the limits of vertical scalability, Cosmos' multi-chain architecture allows for **one application to run in parallel** on different chains, all the while being operated by the same validator set. This inter-chain horizontal scalability theoretically allows for infinite vertical-like scalability.

<HighlightBox type="info">

A **validator** is one or more cooperating computers that participate in the consensus by, among other things, creating blocks.

</HighlightBox>

### How Does Cosmos Promote Sovereignty?

> 

Reviewer 3: I think we could say more here about the application specific blockchains. It's not just that its 1 layer governance, but that the chain can be tailored to the needs of the application in many ways, and can define the level of security it needs (and needs to pay for).

Also on the 2 layer gov front the base chain can upgrade in ways that break your applications. And its base economics can interfere with your own economics. Etc. So building out your own chain gives you a full stack environment with users, validators, community, infrastructure explicitly dedicated to that application.

Reviewer 3: It might be worth linking to some good video presentations where we go into this kinda stuff more. I think Sunny's Many Chains One Ecosystem might be good

Applications deployed on general-purpose blockchains all share the same underlying environment. When a change in the application needs to be made, it not only depends on the governance structures of the application but also on that of the environment, i.e. the governance mechanisms set by the protocol on which the application builds. Thus, the chain's governance limits the application's sovereignty. For this reason, it is often called a **two-layer governance**.

Cosmos resolves this issue as one can build a blockchain tailored to the application. There are no limits to the application's governance if every chain is maintained by its own set of validators. Cosmos follows a design of a **one-layer governance**.

### How Does Cosmos Improve User Experience?

> In the world of traditional general-purpose blockchains, application design and efficiency are limited for blockchain developers. They have to find the simplistic use case the blockchain is designed for.

Reviewer 3: It's not really clear that Ethereum's use case is "simplistic". Developers can still build basically anything. It's just more expensive and clunky and not tailored to your needs and so on

In the Cosmos universe, the standardization of architecture components, while still providing customization opportunities, frees up the possibility of unconstrained, seamless, and intuitive user experiences.

Further, as the same ground rules apply, i.e. standardization of components, it becomes easier for users to navigate between different blockchains and applications. At the same time, it makes blockchain development easier.

> In the end, Cosmos makes the world easier for developers while making DApps easier to use.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In the end, Cosmos makes the world easier for developers while making DApps easier to use. Cosmos enables sovereignty, with interoperability!
```

Necessary preliminary work included append-only, cryptographically secure logs using hashing, authentication and encryption keys, as well as the conceptual development of smart contracts and consensus mechanisms in peer-to-peer (P2P) networks with Byzantine fault-tolerance (BFT).

On the fateful October 31, 2008, an individual, or group, calling itself Satoshi Nakamoto proposed a **P2P network for a digital currency**, calling it **Bitcoin**. It introduced a novel consensus mechanism, now referred to as Nakamoto Consensus, that uses Proof-of-Work (PoW) to enable nodes to reach agreement in a decentralized network. Suddenly, it became possible to send online payments directly between parties **independently of financial institutions and trusted third parties**. Bitcoin became the first public, decentralized application.

<HighlightBox type="info">

  Want to take a look at the [Bitcoin White Paper](https://bitcoin.org/bitcoin.pdf)?

</HighlightBox>

<ExpansionPanel title="I heard about PoW, tell me more">

> Proof-of-Work (PoW), used to achieve BFT, is best described as a cryptographic puzzle solved by a network's node, called miner. The puzzle is a task of pre-defined, arbitrary difficulty. At the scale of the network, the outcome is akin to a lottery with a single winning node.

Reviewer 4: The difficulty of the task is not arbritrary, it is calculated by the latest input of hashpower.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Proof-of-Work (PoW), used to achieve BFT, is best described as a cryptographic puzzle solved by a network's node, called miner. The puzzle is a task of pre-defined, arbitrary difficulty. At the current scale of the network, the outcome is akin to a lottery with a single winning node.
```

> In most cases, the task consists of a search for an unknown, random number (in the jargon, a nonce). For it to be a winning nonce, when combined with ordered transactions in a block, the result ought to be a hash value matching a pre-defined criteria. Finding the nonce is evidence of considerable effort, or work, invested in the search. Each node uses its computing power to be the first to solve the puzzle, winning the right to author the latest block.

Reviewer 4: What does `In most cases` mean? Do we take into account that later there exist some approaches where the puzzles actually solve something "meaningful"?

Reviewer 5: @toschdev would you happen to know the answer to this? I think we can assume that all PoW solutions are useless, right?
